OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

51³

and void3 and the illegal donation was confiscated for the use of C H A Ρ·-

XXV.

the treasury. By a subsequent regulation, it should seem, that the cm)

same provisions were extended to nuns and bishop33 and that all
persons of the ecclefiastical order were rendered incapable of re.-
ceiving any testamentary gifts, and strictly confined to the natural
and lega-l· rights of inheritance. As the guardian of domestic happi-
ness and virtue, Valentinian applied this severe remedy to the grow—
ing evil. In the capital of the empire, the femal'es of noble and
opulent houses polseffed a very ample share of independent property:
and many of those devout females had embraced the doctrines of
Christianity, not only with the cold affent of the understanding, but
with the warmth of affection, and perhaps with the eagerness of
fastiion. They sacrificed the pleasures of dress and luxury 3 and re-
nounced, for the praise of chastity‚ the soft endearments of conjugal
society. Some ecclesiastic, of real or apparent sancotity, was chosen
to dire& their timorous conscience, and to amuse the vacant ten-
derness of their beart: and the unbounded confidence,. which they
hastily bestowed, was often abused by knaves and enthufiasts; who
hastened from the extremities of the East,.to enjoy, on a splendid
theatrc, the privileges of the monastic profeffion. By their contempt
of the world, ,they insenfibly acquired its most defirable advantagea5
the lively attachment, perhaps, of a young and beautiful woman, the
delicate plenty of an opulent· household, and the respedfful homage
of the ssaves, the freedmen, and the clients of a senatorial family.
The immense fortunes of the Roman ladies were gradually- con-
sumed, in lavish alms and eiepenfive pilgrimages3 and the artfulmonk,>
who had assigned himself the first, or poffibly the sole place, in the
testament of his spiritual daughter, still presumed to declare, with.
the smooth face of hypocrisy, that he was only the instrument of>
charity, and the steward of the poor. The lucrative, but disgracef ,

5 trade,¹

