14

C H A P.
-» XVII.

THE DECLINE AND FALL

The master of the Roman world, who aspir-ed to ere& an eternal

eoe-s..) monument of the glories of his reign, could employ in the prose-

Progress of
the work.

cution >of that great work the weahh, the labour, and all that yet
remained of the genius of obedient millions. Some estimate may be
formed of the expence bestowed with imperial liberality on the foun-
dation of Constantinople, by the allowance of about two millions five
hundred thousand pounds for the construetion of the walls, the por-
times, and the aqueduc‘ls ³⁹. The forests that overshadowed the
shores of the Euxine, and the eelebrii‘ted quari-ies of white marble in
the little issand of Proconnesus, supplied an inexhaustible stock of
materials, ready to be conveyed, by the convenience of a ihort
water-carriage, to the harbour of Byzantium ⁴⁰. A multitude of
labourers and artificers urged the conclusion of the work with inces-
sant toil: but the impatience of Constantine soon discovered, that, in
the decline of the arts, the {kin as well as numbers of his architeCis
bore a very unequal proportion to the greatness of his designs. The
magistrates of the most distant provinces were therefore directed to
institute schools, to appoint professbrs, and, by the hopes of rewards
and privilege& to engage in the study and praeiice of architeeture a
sufficient number of ingenious youths, who had received a liberal
education ⁴¹. The buildings of the new city were executed by such
artificers as the reign of Constantine could afford 3 but they were
decorated by the hands of the most celebrated masters of the age of
Pericles and Alexander. To revive the genius of Phidias and Lysippus,

former contains 850, and the latter 1160 of quarries of Proconnesus, see Strabo, l. xiii.

those divifiom, p. 588. The latitu- had already furnissoed
³7 Six hundred centenaries, or sixty thou- the materials of the stately buildings of Cy-

sand pounds weight of gold. This sum is zicus.

taken from Codinus Antiquit. Const. p. 11.; 4¹ See the Codex Theodos. l. xiii. tit. iv.

but unless that contemptible author had de· leg· ι. This law is dated in the year 334,

rived hisinformntion from some purer sources, aud was addreffed to the praefeft of I'taly, ⁷

he would probably have boen unacquainted whoscjurisdifiion emended over Africa. The

with so obsolete a mode of rechoning. commentary of Godcfroy on the whole title
⁴³ For the forests of the Black Sea, con· well deserves to be consulted.

fult Tournefort‚ Lettre XV1.: for the marble

2 surpassed

